Finite element method is a classic numerical method for solving partial
differential equations. In this chapter, we will give a brief
introduction to this method. discuss its basic properties and error
estimates. In later chapters, we will show that the neural network
functions can be viewed as an extension of finite element function. In
this chapter, we discuss the classical linear finite element spaces, the
error estimate of the finite element method and adaptivity method to
improve the approximation. For shape-regular mesh, we will establish
both the upper and lower bound of the approximation error.

Linear finite element spaces {#FEspace}
============================

In this section, we introduce linear finite element spaces. We will walk
through the basic setup, and derive some error estimates.

Triangulations
--------------

Given a bounded polyhedral domain $\Om\subset \mathbb {R}^d$, a
geometric triangulation (also called mesh or grid)
$\mathcal T_h=\{\tau\}$ of $\Omega$ is a set of $d$-simplices such that

1.  $\overline \Omega=\cup \tau$, where $ \overline \Omega$ denotes the
    closure of $\Omega$.

2.  if $\tau_1$ and $\tau_2$ are distinct elements in $\mathcal T_h$
    then
    $\stackrel{\circ}{\tau _1}\cap \stackrel{\circ}{\tau _2} = \varnothing$,
    where $\stackrel{\circ}{\tau _i}$ denotes the interior of
    $\tau_i, i=1,2$ .

Examples of triangulations for $\Omega=(0,1)$ ($d=1$) and for
$\Omega=(0,1)^2$ ($d=2$) are shown in Figure \[fig:1dpartition\] and
Figure \[2duniform\], respectively.

(32,1) (8,0)[(1,0)[16]{}]{} (8,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{} (7.5,1)[$x_0$]{}
(9,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{} (10,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{} (11,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{}
(12,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{} (13,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{} (14,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{}
(15,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{} (16,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{} (15.5,1)[$x_i$]{}
(17,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{} (18,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{} (19,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{}
(20,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{} (21,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{} (22,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{}
(23,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{} (24,0)[(0,1)[0.3]{}]{} (23.5,1)[$x_{n+1}$]{}

Given $\Omega=(0,1)$, we consider the mesh: $$\label{partitionyx}
 0=x_0<x_1<\cdots<x_{n+1}=1, \quad x_i=\frac{i}{n+1},\quad (i=0,\cdots,n+1)$$
which is the 1D uniform grid shown in Figure \[fig:1dpartition\].

![2D
grids[]{data-label="2duniform"}](figures/grid1.png "fig:"){width=".25\textwidth"}
![2D
grids[]{data-label="2duniform"}](figures/u00.pdf "fig:"){width=".25\textwidth"}
![2D
grids[]{data-label="2duniform"}](figures/2ddiskpartition.pdf "fig:"){width=".25\textwidth"}

Denote
$$h_\tau=\mbox{\rm diam} (\tau)\quad  \hbox{(diameter of the smallest sphere containing $\overline{\tau}$)},$$
and $$h=\max_{\tau\in\mathcal T_h} h_\tau;\quad
\underline{h}=\min_{\tau\in\mathcal T_h} h_\tau.$$ A set of
triangulations $\mathscr T$ is called [*shape regular*]{} if there
exists a constant $c_0$ such that
$$\label{shape} \max _{\tau \in \mathcal T_h} \frac{h_{\tau}^d}{|\tau|}\leq c_0, \quad \forall \, \mathcal T_h\in
\mathscr T,$$ where $|\tau|$ is the measure of $\tau$ in $\mbb R^d$.
This assumption can also be represented as $$\Label{A3.1}
\max_{\tau\in\ct_h}\frac{h_\tau}{\rho_\tau}\le\sigma_1,\quad \forall \, \mathcal T_h\in
\mathscr T,$$ where $\rho_\tau$ denotes the radius of the ball inscribed
in $\tau$. In two dimensions, it is equivalent to the minimal angle of
each triange is bounded below uniformly in the shape regular class. In
addition to (\[shape\]), if $$\Label{A3.2}
  \frac{\max _{\tau \in \mathcal T_h}|\tau|}{\min _{\tau \in \mathcal T_h}|\tau|} \leq \rho,\quad \forall \, \mathcal T_h\in \mathscr T,$$
$\mathscr T$ is called [*quasi-uniform*]{}. For quasi-uniform grids,
$h=\max _{\tau \in \mathcal T_h} h_{\tau}$, the mesh size of
$\mathcal T_h$, is used to measure the approximation rate. The
assumption is a local assumption, as is meant by above definition, for
$d=2$ for example, it assures that each triangle will not degenerate
into a segment in the limiting case. On the other hand, the assumption
is a global assumption, which says that the smallest mesh size is not
too small compared with the largest mesh size of the same triangulation.
By the definition, in a quasi-uniform triangulation, all the elements
are about the same size asymptotically.

Let $ x_{i}=(x^1_{i}, \cdots, x^d_{i})^t, i=1,\cdots, d+1$ be $d+1$
points in $\mbb R^d$ which do not all lie in one hyper-plane. The
[*convex hull*]{} of the $d+1$ points $ x_1, \cdots,  x_{d+1}$ (See
Figure \[fig:barycentricCoor\])
$$\tau :=\{ x=\sum _{i=1}^{d+1}\lambda _i x_i \, | \, 0\leq \lambda_i\leq 1, i=1:d+1, \sum _{i=1}^{d+1}\lambda _i=1 \}$$
is defined as a [*geometric $d$-simplex*]{} generated (or spanned) by
the vertices $ x_1, \cdots,  x_{d+1}$. For example, a triangle is a
$2$-simplex and a tetrahedron is a $3$-simplex. For an integer
$0\leq m \leq d-1$, an $m$-dimensional face of $\tau$ is any $m$-simplex
generated by $m+1$ of the vertices of $\tau$. Zero-dimenisonal faces are
vertices and one-dimensional faces are called edges of $\tau$. The
$(d-1)$-face opposite to the vertex $ x_i$ will be denoted by $F_i$.

![Geometric explanation of barycentric
coordinates[]{data-label="fig:barycentricCoor"}](figures/barycentricCoor1D.pdf "fig:"){width="2.5cm"}
![Geometric explanation of barycentric
coordinates[]{data-label="fig:barycentricCoor"}](figures/barycentricCoor2D.pdf "fig:"){width="3cm"}
![Geometric explanation of barycentric
coordinates[]{data-label="fig:barycentricCoor"}](figures/barycentricCoor3D.pdf "fig:"){width="3.1cm"}

On the other hand, for any $ x\in \tau$, there exist unique numbers
$\lambda _1,\cdots, \lambda _{d+1}$ satisfying
$\displaystyle 0\leq \lambda_i\leq 1, i=1:d+1, \sum _{i=1}^{d+1}\lambda _i=1$
such that $\displaystyle x=\sum _{i=1}^{d+1}\lambda _i x_i$, thus we can
denote $\lambda _1,\cdots, \lambda _{d+1}$ as
$\lambda _1( x),\cdots, \lambda _{d+1}( x)$. In fact, the numbers
$\lambda _1( x),\cdots, \lambda _{d+1}( x)$ are called [*barycentric
coordinates*]{} of $ x$ with respect to the $d+1$ points
$ x_1, \cdots,  x_{d+1}$. There is a simple geometric meaning of the
barycentric coordinates. Given a $ x\in
\tau$, let $\tau _i( x)$ be the simplex with vertices $ x_i$ replaced by
$ x$. Then it can be easily shown that $$\label{eq:lambdasolution}
\lambda _i( x) = |\tau _i( x)|/|\tau|,$$ where $|\cdot|$ is the
Lebesgure measure in $\mbb R^d$, namely area in two dimensions and
volume in three dimensions. Note that $\lambda
_i( x)$ is affine function of $ x$ and vanishes on the face $F_i$. We
list the four basic properties of barycentric coordinate below:

1.  $0\leq \lambda_i( x)\leq 1$;

2.  $\displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^{d+1} \lambda_i( x)=1$;

3.  $\lambda_i( x)\in P_1(\tau)$, where $P_1(\tau)$ denotes the space of
    polynomials of degree $1$ (linear) on $\tau\in \mathcal T_h$;

4.  $\lambda_i( x_j)=\delta_{ij}=\begin{cases}
    1, \quad &\text{if}  \quad  i=j\\
    0, \quad &\text{if} \quad i\neq j
    \end{cases}.$

Continuous linear finite element spaces {#linearFE}
---------------------------------------

A conforming linear finite element function in a domain $\Omega\subset
\mathbb R^d$ is a continuous function that is piecewise linear function
with respect to a grid or mesh consisting of a union of simplices.

Given a shape regular triangulation $\mathcal T_h$ of $\Omega$, we
define the continuous linear finite element space as $$\label{LinFE}
V_h:=\{v\,|\, v\in C(\overline \Omega), \,\hbox{ and }\, v|_{\tau}\in
P_1(\tau), \forall \tau \in \mathcal T_h\},$$ where $P_1(\tau)$ denotes
the space of polynomials of degree $1$ (linear) on
$\tau\in \mathcal T_h$. Whenever we need to deal with boundary
conditions, we further define $V_{h,0}=V_h\cap H_0^1(\Omega)$.

We note here that the global continuity is also necessary in the
definition of $V_h$ in the sense that if $u$ has a square interable
gradient, that is $u\in H^1(\Omega)$, and $u$ is piecewise smooth, then
$u$ is continuous.

We always use $n_h$ to denote the dimension of finite element spaces.
For $V_h$, $n_h$ is the number of vertices of the triangulation
$\mathcal T_h$ and for $V_{h,0}$, $n_h$ is the number of interior
vertices.

#### Nodal basis functions and dual basis

For linear finite element spaces, we have the so called *a standard
nodal basis functions* $\{\varphi
_i,i=1,\cdots n_h\}$ such that $\varphi_i$ is piecewise linear (with
respect to the triangulation) and $\varphi_i(x_j)=\delta_{i,j}$. Note
that $\varphi _i|_\tau$ is the corresponding barycentrical coordinates
of $x_i$. See Figure \[fig:nodalbasis\] for an illustration in 2D.

![Dual basis functions of $V_h$ in 1D for
$n_h=5$.[]{data-label="fig:dualbasis"}](6DL/figures/Dualbasis){height="4.5cm"
width="7cm"}

Let $(\varphi_i^*)_{i=1}^{n_h}$ be the dual basis of
$(\varphi_i)_{i=1}^{n_h}$, namely $$\label{eq:1}
(\varphi_i^*, \varphi_j) =\delta_{i, j}, \quad i, j=1,\ldots, n_h.$$ We
notice that all the nodal basis functions $\{\varphi_i\}$ are locally
supported, but their dual basis functions $\{\varphi_i^*\}$ are in
general not locally supported (see Figure \[fig:dualbasis\]). The nodal
basis functions $\{\varphi_i\}$ are easily constructed in terms of
barycentric coordinate functions. The dual basis $\{\varphi_i^*\}$ are
only interesting for theoretical consideration and it is not necessary
to know the actual constructions of these functions.

![Nodal basis functions in 1d and
2d[]{data-label="fig:nodalbasis"}](figures/basisfunction "fig:"){height="4.5cm"
width="7cm"} ![Nodal basis functions in 1d and
2d[]{data-label="fig:nodalbasis"}](figures/nodalbasis.pdf "fig:"){height="5cm"
width="7cm"}

Since $\{\varphi_i,i=1,\cdots n_h\}$ is a basis of $V_h$, therefore for
any $v_h\in V_h$, we have the representation
$$v_h(x)=\sum_{i=1}^{n_h}v_h(x_i)\varphi_i(x).$$

Let us see how our construction of continuous linear finite space and
the nodal basis looks like in one spatial dimension. Associated with the
mesh $$\mathcal T_h=\{0=x_0<x_1<\ldots<x_{n_h}<x_{n_h+1}=1\},$$ by the
definition given in and the definition
$V_{h,0}=V_{h}\cap H_0^1(\Omega)$, we have $$\begin{array}{ll}
V_{h,0}=\{v:~\mbox{$v$ is continuous and piecewise linear}~ \mbox{w.~r.~t. $\mathcal T_h$, } v(0)=v(1)=0\}.
\end{array}$$ A plot of a typical element of $V_{h,0}$ is shown in
Fig. \[fig:1dtypical\].

It is easily calculated (as we already mentioned), that the dimension of
$V_{h,0}$ is equal to the number of internal vertices, and the nodal
basis functions spanning $V_{h,0}$ (for $i=1,2,\cdots,n_h$) are (see
also Fig. \[fig:nodalbasis\]): $$\label{1dbasis:function}
\varphi_i(x)=\left\{\begin{array}{cl}
\displaystyle \frac{x-x_{i-1}}{h}, & x\in[x_{i-1},x_i];\\
\displaystyle \frac{x_{i+1}-x}{h}, & x\in[x_{i},x_{i+1}];\\
0 &\mbox{elsewhere}.
\end{array}\right.$$

![Plot of a typical element from
$V_{h,0}$.[]{data-label="fig:1dtypical"}](figures/femfunction1.pdf){width="2in"}
